- 1 -
Redacted (PR) from Chapter 1 of Ethics in an Age of Technology: The Gifford Lectures 1989-1991, Volume 2,
HarperCollins Publishers Inc, 1993.
Views of Technology
by
Ian G. Barbour
Technology, the source of the problem, will once again prove to contain within itself the germs of a
solution compatible with the betterment of man¡¯s lot and dignity.
CHARLES SUSSKIND1
Our enslavement to the machine has never been more complete.
JOHN ZERMAN AND ALICE CARNES2
What we call Man¡¯s power over Nature turns out to be a power exercised by some men over other men
with Nature as its instrument.
C. S. LEWIS3
Appraisals of modern technology diverge widely. Some see it as the beneficent source of higher living standards,
improved health, and better communications. They claim that any problems created by technology are themselves
amenable to technological solutions. Others are critical of technology, holding that it leads to alienation from nature,
environmental destruction, the mechanization of human life, and the loss of human freedom. A third group asserts
that technology is ambiguous, its impacts varying according to the social context in which it is designed and used,
because it is both a product and a source of economic and political power.4
In this chapter, views of technology are grouped under three headings: Technology as Liberator,
Technology as Threat, and Technology as Instrument of Power. In each case the underlying assumptions and value
judgments are examined. I will indicate why I agree with the third of these positions, which emphasizes the social
construction and use of particular technologies. The issues cut across disciplines; I draw from the writings of
engineers, historians, sociologists, political scientists, philosophers, and theologians.
Technology may be defined as the application of organized knowledge to practical tasks by ordered
systems of people and machines.
5 There are several advantages to such a broad definition. ¡°Organized knowledge¡±
allows us to include technologies based on practical experience and invention as well as those based on scientific
theories. The ¡°practical tasks¡± can include both the production of mater (in industry and agriculture, for instance)
and the provision of services (by computers, communications media, and biotechnologies, among others). Reference
to ¡°ordered systems of people and machines¡± directs attention to social institutions as well as to the hardware of
technology. The breadth of the definition also reminds us that there are major differences among technologies.
1. TECHNOLOGY AS LIBERATOR
Throughout modern history, technological developments have been enthusiastically welcomed because of their
potential for liberating us from hunger, disease, and poverty. Technology has been celebrated as the source of
material progress and human fulfillment.
1. THE BENEFITS OF TECHNOLOGY
Defenders of technology point out that four kinds of benefits can be distinguished if one looks at its recent history
and considers its future:
1. Higher Living Standards. New drugs, better medical attention, and improved sanitation and nutrition 
- 2 -
have more than doubled the average life span in industrial nations within the past century. Machines have released
us from much of the backbreaking labor that in previous ages absorbed most of people¡¯s time and energy. Material
progress represents liberation from the tyranny of nature. The ancient dream of a life free from famine and disease is
beginning to be realized through technology. The standard of living of low-income families in industrial societies
has doubled in a generation, even though relative incomes have changed little. Many people in developing nations
now look on technology as their principal source of hope. Productivity and economic growth, it is said, benefit
everyone in the long run.
2. Opportunity for Choice. Individual choice has a wider scope today than ever before because technology
has produced new options not previously available and a greater range of products and services. Social and
geographical mobility allow a greater choice of jobs and locations. In urban industrial society, a person¡¯s options are
not as limited by parental or community expectations as they were in a small-town agrarian society. The dynamism
of technology can liberate people from static and confining traditions to assume responsibility for their own lives.
Birth control techniques, for example, allow a couple to choose the size and timing of their family. Power over
nature gives greater opportunities for the exercise of human freedom.6
3. More Leisure. Increases in productivity have led to shorter working hours. Computers and automation
hold the promise of eliminating much of the monotonous work typical of earlier industrialism. Through most of
history, leisure and cultural pursuits have been the privilege of the few, while the mass of humanity was preoccupied
with survival. In an affluent society there is time for continuing education, the arts, social service, sports, and
participation in community life. Technology can contribute to the enrichment of human life and the flowering of
creativity. Laborsaving devices free us to do what machines cannot do. Proponents of this viewpoint say that people
can move beyond materialism when their material needs are met.
4. Improved Communications. With new forms of transportation, one can in a few hours travel to distant
cities that once took months to reach. With electronic technologies (radio, television, computer networks, and so on),
the speed, range, and scope of communication have vastly increased. The combination of visual image and auditory
message have an immediacy not found in the linear sequence of the printed word. These new media offer the
possibility of instant worldwide communication, greater interaction, understanding, and mutual appreciation in the
¡°global village.¡± It has been suggested that by dialing coded numbers on telephones hooked into computer networks,
citizens could participate in an instant referendum on political issues. According to its defenders, technology brings
psychological and social benefits as well as material progress.
In part 2 we will encounter optimistic forecasts of each of the particular technologies examined. In
agriculture, some experts anticipate that the continuing Green Revolution and the genetic engineering of new crops
will provide adequate food for a growing world population. In the case of energy, it is claimed that breeder reactors
and fusion will provide environmentally benign power to replace fossil fuels. Computer enthusiasts anticipate the
Information Age in which industry is automated and communications networks enhance commercial, professional,
and personal life. Biotechnology promises the eradication of genetic diseases, the improvement of health, and the
deliberate design of new species¡ªeven the modification of humanity itself.
2. OPTIMISTIC VIEWS OF TECHNOLOGY
Let us look at some authors who have expressed optimism regarding technology. Melvin Kranzberg, a prominent
historian of technology, has presented a very positive picture of the technological past and future. He argues that
urban industrial societies offer more freedom than rural ones and provide greater choice of occupations, friends,
activities, and life-styles. The work week has been cut in half, and human wants have been dramatically fulfilled.7
Emanuel Mesthene, former director of the Harvard Program in Technology and Society, grants that every
technology brings risks as well as benefits, but he says that our task is the rational management of risk. Some
technologies poison the environment, but others reduce pollution. A new technology may displace some workers but
it also creates new jobs. Nineteenth-century factories and twentieth-century assembly lines did involve dirty and
monotonous work, but the newer technologies allow greater creativity and individuality.
8
A postindustrial society, it is said, is already beginning to emerge. In this new society, according to the
sociologist Daniel Bell, power will be based on knowledge rather than property. The dominant class will he
scientists, engineers, and technical experts; the dominant institutions will be intellectual ones (universities, industrial
laboratories, and research institutes). The economy will be devoted mainly to services rather than material goods.
Decisions will be made on rational-technical grounds, marking ¡°the end of ideology.¡± There will be a general
consensus on social values; experts will coordinate social planning, using rational techniques such as decision theory
and systems analysis. This will be a future-oriented society, the age of the professional managers, the technocrats.9
- 3 -
A bright picture of the coming technological society has been given by many ¡°futurists,¡± including Buckminster
Fuller, Herman Kahn, and Alvin Toffler.10
Samuel Florman is an articulate engineer and author who has written extensively defending technology
against its detractors. He insists that the critics have romanticized the life of earlier centuries and rural societies.
Living standards were actually very low, work was brutal, and roles were rigidly defined. People have much greater
freedom in technological societies. The automobile, for example, enables people to do what they want and enhances
geographical and class mobility. People move to cities because they prefer life there to ¡°the tedium and squalor of
the countryside.¡± Florman says that worker alienation in industry is rare, and many people prefer the comfortable
monotony of routine tasks to the pressures of decision and accountability. Technology is not an independent force
out of control: it is the product of human choice, a response to public demand expressed through the marketplace.11
Florman grants that technology often has undesirable side effects, but he says that these are amenable to
technological solutions. One of his heroes is Benjamin Franklin, who ¡°proposed technological ways of coping with
the unpleasant consequences of technology.¡±
12 Florman holds that environmental and health risks are inherent in
every technical advance. Any product or process can be made safer, but always at an economic cost. Economic
growth and lower prices for consumers are often more important than additional safety, and absolute safety is an
illusory goal. Large-scale systems are usually more efficient than small-scale ones. It is often easier to find a
¡°technical fix¡± for a social problem than to try to change human behavior or get agreement on political policies.13
Florman urges us to rely on the judgment of experts in decisions about technology. He says that no citizen
can be adequately informed about complex technical questions such as acid rain or radioactive waste disposal.
Public discussion of these issues only leads to anxiety and erratic political actions. We should rely on the
recommendations of experts on such matters.14 Florman extols the ¡°unquenchable spirit¡± and ¡°irrepressible human
will¡± evident in technology:
For all our apprehensions, we have no choice but to press ahead. We must do so, first, in the name of compassion. By turning our
backs on technological change, we would be expressing our satisfaction with current world levels of hunger, disease, and
privation. Further, we must press ahead in the name of the human adventure. Without experimentation and change our existence
would be a dull business. We simply cannot stop while there are masses to feed and diseases to conquer, seas to explore and
heavens to survey.15
Some theologians have also given very positive appraisals of technology. They see it as it source not only
of higher living standards but also of greater freedom and creative expression. In his earlier writings, Harvey Cox
held that freedom to master and shape the world through technology liberates us from the confines of tradition.
Christianity brought about the desacralization of nature and allowed it to be controlled and used for human
welfare.16 Norris Clarke sees technology as an instrument of human fulfillment and self-expression in the use of our
God-given intelligence to transform the world. Liberation from bondage to nature, he says, is the victory of spirit
over matter. As cocreators with God we can celebrate the contribution of reason to the enrichment of human life.
17
Other theologians have affirmed technology as an instrument of love and compassion in relieving human
suffering¡ªa modern response to the biblical command to feed the hungry and help the neighbor in need.
The Jesuit paleontologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, writing in the early years of nuclear power, computers,
and molecular biology, expressed a hopeful vision of the technological future. He envisioned computers and
electronic communication in a network of interconnected consciousness, a global layer of thought that he called ¡°the
noosphere.¡± He defended eugenics, ¡°artificial neo-life,¡± and the remodeling of the human organism by manipulation
of the genes. With this new power over heredity, he said, we can replace the crude forces of natural selection and
¡°seize the tiller¡± to control the direction of future evolution. We will have total power over matter, ¡°reconstructing
the very stuff of the universe.¡± He looked to a day of interplanetary travel and the unification of our own planet,
based on intellectual and cultural interaction.17
Teilhard¡¯s writings present us with a magnificent sweep of time front past to future. But they do not
consider the institutional structures of economic power and self-interest that now control the directions of
technological development. Teilhard seldom acknowledged the tragic hold of social injustice on human life. He was
writing before the destructive environmental impacts of technology were evident. When Teilhard looked to the past,
he portrayed humanity as an integral part of the natural world, interdependent with other creatures. But when he
looked to the future, he expected that because of our technology and our spirituality we will be increasingly
separated from other creatures. Humanity will move beyond dependence on the organic world. Though he was
ultimately theocentric (centered on God), and he talked about the redemption of the whole cosmos, many of his
images are anthropocentric (centered on humanity) and imply that other forms of life are left behind in the
spiritualization of humankind that technology will help to bring about.
- 4 -
3. A REPLY TO THE OPTIMISTS
First, the environmental costs and human risks of technology are dismissed too rapidly. The optimists are confident
that technical solutions can be found for environmental problems. Of course, pollution abatement technologies can
treat many of the effluents of industry, but often unexpected, indirect, or delayed consequences occur. The effects of
carcinogens may not show up for twenty-five years or more. The increased death rates among shipyard workers
exposed to asbestos in the early 1940s were not evident until the late 1960s. Toxic wastes may contaminate
groundwater decades after they have been buried. The hole in the ozone layer caused by the release of
chlorofluorocarbons had not been anticipated by any scientists. Above all, soil erosion and massive deforestation
threaten the biological resources essential for human life, and global warming from our use of fossil fuels threatens
devastating changes in world climates.
Second, environmental destruction is symptomatic of a deeper problem: alienation from nature. The idea of
human domination of nature has many roots. Western religious traditions have often drawn a sharp line between
humanity and other creatures. Economic institutions treat nature as a resource for human exploitation. But
technological enthusiasts contribute to this devaluation of the natural world if they view it as an object to be
controlled and manipulated. Many engineers are trained in the physical sciences and interpret living things in
mechanistic rather than ecological terms. Others spend their entire professional lives in the technosphere of artifacts,
machines, electronics, and computers, cut off from the world of nature. To be sure, sensitivity to nature is sometimes
found among technological optimists, but it is more frequently found among the critics of technology.
Third, technology has contributed to the concentration of economic and political power. Only relatively
affluent groups or nations can afford the latest technology; the gaps between rich and poor have been perpetuated
and in many cases increased by technological developments. In it world of limited resources, it also appears
impossible for all nations to sustain the standards of living of industrial nations today, much less the higher
standards that industrial nations expect in the future. Affluent nations use a grossly disproportionate share of the
world¡¯s energy and resources. Commitment to justice within nations also requires a more serious analysis of the
distribution of the costs and benefits of technology. We will find many technologies in which one group enjoys the
benefits while another group is exposed to the risks and social costs.
Fourth, large-scale technologies typical of industrial nations today are particularly problematic. They are
capital-intensive rather than labor-intensive, and they add to unemployment in many parts of the world. Large-scale
systems tend to be vulnerable to error, accident, or sabotage. The near catastrophe at the Three Mile Island nuclear
plant in 1979 and the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 were the products of human errors, faulty equipment, poor design,
and unreliable safety procedures. Nuclear energy is a prime example of a vulnerable, centralized, capital-intensive
technology. Systems in which human or mechanical failures can be disastrous are risky even in a stable society,
quite apart from additional risks under conditions of social unrest. The large scale of many current systems is as
much the product of government subsidies, tax and credit policies, and particular corporate interests as of any
inherent economies of scale.
Fifth, greater dependence on experts for policy decisions would not be desirable. The technocrats claim that
their judgments are value free; the technical elite is supposedly nonpolitical. But those with power seldom use it
rationally and objectively when their own interests are at stake. When social planners think they are deciding for the
good of all¡ªwhether in the French or Russian revolution or in the proposed technocracy of the future¡ªthe assumed
innocence of moral intentions is likely to be corrupted in practice. Social controls over the controllers are always
essential. I will suggest that the most important form of freedom is participation in the decisions affecting our lives.
Lastly, we must question the linear view of the science-technology-society relationship, which is assumed
by many proponents of optimistic views. Technology is taken to be applied science, and it is thought to have an
essentially one-way impact on society. The official slogan of the Century of Progress exposition in Chicago in 1933
was: ¡°Science Finds¡ªIndustry Applies¡ªMan Conforms.¡± This has been called ¡°the assembly-line view¡± because it
pictures science at the start of the line and it stream of technological products pouring off the end of the line.19 If
technology is fundamentally benign, there is no need for government interference except to regulate the most serious
risks. Whatever guidance is needed for technological development is supplied by the expression of consumer
preferences through the marketplace. In this view, technologies develop from the ¡°push¡± of science and the ¡°pull¡± of
economic profits. 
- 5 -
II. TECHNOLOGY AS THREAT
At the opposite extreme are the critics of modern technology who see it as a threat to authentic human life. We will
confine ourselves here to criticisms of the human rather than environmental consequences of technology.
1. THE HUMAN COSTS OF TECHNOLOGY
Five characteristics of industrial technology seem to its critics particularly inimical to human fulfillment.20
1. Uniformity in a Mass Society. Mass production yields standardized products, and mass media tend to
produce a uniform national culture. Individuality is lost and local or regional differences are obliterated in the
homogeneity of industrialization. Nonconformity hinders efficiency, so cooperative and docile workers are rewarded.
Even the interactions among people are mechanized and objectified. Human identity is defined by roles in
organizations. Conformity to a mass society jeopardizes spontaneity and freedom. According to the critics, there is
little evidence that an electronic, computerized, automated society will produce more diversity than earlier
industrialism did.
2. Narrow Criteria of Efficiency. Technology leads to rational and efficient organization, which requires
fragmentation, specialization, speed, the maximization of output. The criterion is efficiency in achieving a single
goal or a narrow range of objectives; side effects and human costs are ignored. Quantitative criteria tend to crowd
out qualitative ones. The worker becomes the servant of the machine, adjusting to its schedule and tempo, adapting
to its requirements. Meaningful work roles exist for only a small number of people in industrial societies today.
Advertising creates demand for new products, whether or not they fill real needs, in order to stimulate a larger
volume of production and a consumer society.
3. Impersonality and Manipulation. Relationships in a technological society are specialized and functional.
Genuine community and interpersonal interaction are threatened when people feel like cogs in a well-oiled machine.
In a bureaucracy, the goals of the organization are paramount and responsibility is diffused, so that no one feels
personally responsible. Moreover, technology has created subtle ways of manipulating people and new techniques of
electronic surveillance and psychological conditioning. When the technological mentality is dominant, people are
viewed and treated like objects.
4. Uncontrollability. Separate technologies form an interlocking system, a total, mutually reinforcing
network that seems to lead a life of its own. ¡°Runaway, technology¡± is said to be like a vehicle out of control, with a
momentum that cannot be stopped. Some critics assert that technology is not just a set of adaptable tools for human
use but an all-encompassing form of life, a pervasive structure with its own logic and dynamic. Its consequences are
unintended and unforeseeable. Like the sorcerer¡¯s apprentice who found the magic formula to make his broom carry
water but did not know how to make it stop, we have set in motion forces that we cannot control. The individual
feels powerless facing a monolithic system.
5. Alienation of the Worker. The worker¡¯s alienation was a central theme in the writing of Karl Marx.
Under capitalism, he said, workers do not own their own tools or machines, and they are powerless in their work life.
They can sell their labor as a commodity, but their work is not a meaningful form of self-expression. Marx held that
such alienation is a product of capitalist ownership and would disappear under state ownership. He was optimistic
about the use of technology in a communist economic order, and thus he belongs with the third group below, the
contextualists, but his idea of alienation has influenced the pessimists.
More recent writers point out that alienation has been common in state-managed industrial economies too
and seems to be a product of the division of labor, rationalization of production, and hierarchical management in
large organizations, regardless of the economic system. Studs Terkel and others have found in interviews that
resentment, frustration, and a sense of powerlessness are widespread among American industrial workers. This
contrasts strongly with the greater work autonomy, job satisfaction, arid commitment to work found in the
professions, skilled trades, and family-owned farms.21 Other features of technological development since World War
II have evoked widespread concern. The allocation of more than two-thirds of the U.S. federal research and
development budget to military purposes has diverted expertise from environmental problems and urgent human
needs. Technology also seems to have contributed to the impoverishment of human relationships and a loss of
community. The youth counterculture of the 1970s was critical of technology and sought harmony with nature,
intensity of personal experience, supportive communities, and alternative life-styles apart from the prevailing
industrial order. While many of its expressions were short-lived, many of its characteristic attitudes, including
disillusionment with technology, have persisted among some of the younger generation.22
- 6 -
2. RECENT CRITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
To the French philosopher and social critic Jacques Ellul, technology is an autonomous and uncontrollable force
that dehumanizes all that it touches. The enemy is ¡°technique¡±¡ªa broad term Ellul uses to refer to the technological
mentality and structure that he sees pervading not only industrial processes, but also all social, political, and
economic life affected by them. Efficiency and organization, he says, are sought in all activities. The machine
enslaves people when they adapt to its demands. Technology has its own inherent logic and inner necessity. Rational
order is everywhere imposed at the expense of spontaneity and freedom.
Ellul ends with a technological determinism, since technique is self-perpetuating, all-pervasive, and
inescapable. Any opposition is simply absorbed as we become addicted to the products of technology. Public
opinion and the state become the servants of technique rather than its masters. Technique is global, monolithic, and
unvarying among diverse regions and nations. Ellul offers us no way out, since all our institutions, the media, and
our personal lives are totally in its grip. He holds that biblical ethics can provide a viewpoint transcending society
from which to judge the sinfulness of the technological order and can give us the motivation to revolt against it, but
he holds out little hope of controlling it.23 Some interpreters see in Ellul¡¯s recent writings a very guarded hope that a
radical Christian freedom that rejects cultural illusions of technological progress might in the long run lead to the
transformation rather than the rejection of technology. But Ellul does not spell out such a transformation because he
holds that the outcome is in God¡¯s hands, not ours, and most of his writings are extremely pessimistic about social
change.24
The political scientist Langdon Winner has given a sophisticated version of the argument that technology is
an autonomous system that shapes all human activities to its own requirements. It makes little difference who is
nominally in control¡ªelected politicians, technical experts, capitalist executives, or socialist managers¡ªif decisions
are determined by the demands of the technical system. Human ends are then adapted to suit the techniques
available rather than the reverse. Winner says that large-scale systems are self perpetuating, extending their control
over resources and markets and molding human life to fit their own smooth functioning. Technology is not a neutral
means to human ends but an all-encompassing system that imposes its patterns on every aspect of life and thought.25
The philosopher Hans Jonas is impressed by the new scale of technological power and its influence on
events distant in time and place. Traditional Western ethics have been anthropocentric and have considered only
short-range consequences. Technological change has its own momentum, and its pace is too rapid for trial-and-error
readjustments. Now genetics gives us power over humanity itself. Jonas calls for a new ethic of responsibility for the
human future and for nonhuman nature. We should err on the side of caution, adopting policies designed to avert
catastrophe rather than to maximize short-run benefits. ¡°The magnitude of these stakes, taken with the insufficiency
of our predictive knowledge, leads to the pragmatic rule to give the prophecy of doom priority over the prophecy of
bliss.¡± 26 We should seek ¡°the least harm,¡± not ¡°the greatest good.¡± We have no right to tamper genetically with
human nature or to accept policies that entail even the remote possibility of the extinction of humanity in a nuclear
holocaust.
Another philosopher, Albert Borgmann, does not want to return to a pretechnological past, but he urges the
selection of technologies that encourage genuine human fulfillment. Building on the ideas of Heidegger, he holds
that authentic human existence requires the engagement and depth that occur when simple things and practices focus
our attention and center out lives. We have let technology define the good life in terms of production and
consumption, and we have ended with mindless labor and mindless leisure. A fast-food restaurant replaces the
family meal, which was an occasion of communication and celebration. The simple pleasures of making music,
hiking and running, gathering with friends around the hearth, or engaging in creative and self-reliant work should be
our goals. Borgmann thinks that some large-scale capital-intensive industry is needed (especially in transportation
and communication), but he urges the development of small-scale labor-intensive, locally owned enterprises (in arts
and crafts, health care, and education, for example). We should challenge the rule of technology and restrict it to the
limited role of supporting the humanly meaningful activities associated with a simpler life.27
In Technology and Power, the psychologist David Kipnis maintains that those who control a technology
have power over other people and this affects personal attitudes as well as social structures. Power holders interpret
technological superiority as moral superiority and tend to look down on weaker parties. Kipnis shows that military
and transportation technologies fed the conviction of colonists that they were superior to colonized peoples.
Similarly, medical knowledge and specialization have led doctors to treat patients as impersonal cases and to keep
patients at arms length with a minimum of personal communication. Automation gave engineers and managers
increased power over workers, who no longer needed special skills. In general, ¡°power corrupts¡± and leads people to
rationalize their use of power for their own ends. Kipnis claims that the person with technological knowledge often 
- 7 -
has not only a potent instrument of control but also a self-image that assumes superiority over people who lack that
knowledge and the concomitant opportunities to make decisions affecting their lives.28
Some Christian groups are critical of the impact of technology on human life. The Amish, for example,
have resolutely turned their backs on radios, television, and even automobiles. By hard work, community
cooperation, and frugal ways, they have prospered in agriculture and have continued their distinctive life styles and
educational patterns. Many theologians who do not totally reject technology criticize its tendency to generate a
Promethean pride and it quest for unlimited power. The search for omnipotence is a denial of creaturehood.
Unqualified devotion to technology as a total way of life, they say, is a form of idolatry. Technology is finally
thought of as the source of salvation, the agent of secularized redemption.29 In an affluent society, a legitimate
concern for material progress readily becomes a frantic pursuit of comfort, a total dedication to self-gratification.
Such an obsession with things distorts our basic values as well as our relationships with other persons. Exclusive
dependence on technological rationality also leads to a truncation of experience, a loss of imaginative and emotional
life, and an impoverishment of personal existence.
Technology is imperialistic and addictive, according to these critics. The optimists may think that, by
fulfilling our material needs, technology liberates us from materialism and allows us to turn to intellectual, artistic,
and spiritual pursuits. But it does not seem to be working out that way. Our material wants have escalated and
appear insatiable. Yesterday¡¯s luxuries are today¡¯s necessities. The rich are usually more anxious about their future
than the poor. Once we allow technology to define the good life, we have excluded many important human values
from consideration.
3. A REPLY TO THE PESSIMISTS
In replying to these authors, we may note first that there are great variations among technologies, which are ignored
when they are lumped together and condemned wholesale. Computerized offices differ greatly from steel mills and
auto assembly lines, even if they share some features in common. One survey of journal articles finds that
philosophers and those historians who trace broad trends (in economic and urban history, for example) often claim
that technology determines history, whereas the historians or sociologists who make detailed studies of particular
technologies are usually aware of the diversity of social, political, and economic interests that affect the design of a
machine and its uses.34
 I will maintain that the uses of any technology vary greatly depending on its social contexts.
To be sure, technological systems are interlocked, but they do not form a monolithic system impervious to political
influence or totally dominating all other social forces. In particular, technology assessment and legislation offer
opportunities for controlling technology.
Second, technological pessimists neglect possible avenues for the redirection of technology. The
¡°inevitability¡± or ¡°inherent logic¡± of technological developments is not supported by historical studies. We will note
below some cases in which there were competing technical designs and the choice among them was affected by
various political and social factors. Technological determinism underestimates the diversity of forces that contribute
to technological change. Unrelieved pessimism undercuts human action and becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. If
we are convinced that nothing can be done to improve the system, we will indeed do nothing to try to improve it.
This would give to the commercial sponsors of technology the choices that are ours as responsible citizens.
Third, technology can be the servant of human values. Life is indeed impoverished if the technological
attitudes of mastery and power dominate one¡¯s outlook. Calculation and control do exclude mutuality and
receptivity in human relationships and prevent the humility and reverence that religious awareness requires. But I
would submit that the threat to these areas of human existence comes not from technology itself but from
preoccupation with material progress and unqualified reliance on technology. We can make decisions about
technology within a wider context of human and environmental values.
III. TECHNOLOGY AS INSTRUMENT OF POWER
A third basic position holds that technology is neither inherently good nor inherently evil but is an ambiguous
instrument of power whose consequences depend on its social context. Some technologies seem to be neutral if they
can be used for good or evil according to the goals of the users. A knife can be used for surgery or for murder. An
isotope separator can enrich uranium for peaceful nuclear reactors or for aggression with nuclear weapons. But
historical analysis suggests that most technologies are already molded by particular interests and institutional goals.
Technologies are social constructions, and they are seldom neutral because particular purposes are already built into 
- 8 -
their design. Alternative purposes would lead to alternative designs. Yet most designs still allow some choice as to
how they are deployed.
1. TECHNOLOGY AND POLITICAL POWER
Like the authors in the previous group, those in this group are critical of many features of current technology. But
they offer hope that technology can be used for more humane ends, either by political measures for more effective
guidance within existing institutions or by changes in the economic and political systems themselves.
The people who make most of the decisions about technology today are not a technical elite or technocrats
trying to run society rationally or disinterested experts whose activity was supposed to mark ¡°the end of ideology.¡±
The decisions are made by managers dedicated to the interests of institutions, especially industrial corporations and
government bureaucracies. The goals of research are determined largely by the goals of institutions: corporate
profits, institutional growth, bureaucratic power, and so forth. Expertise serves the interests of organizations and
only secondarily the welfare of people or the environment.
The interlocking structure of technologically based government agencies and corporations, sometimes
called the ¡°technocomplex,¡± is wider than the ¡°military-industrial complex.¡± Many companies are virtually
dependent on government contracts. The staff members of regulatory agencies, in turn, are mainly recruited from the
industries they are supposed to regulate. Networks of industries with common interests form lobbies of immense
political power. For example, U.S. legislation supporting railroads and public mass transit systems was blocked by a
coalition of auto manufacturers, insurance companies, oil companies, labor unions, and the highway construction
industry. But citizens can also influence the direction of technological development. Public opposition to nuclear
power plants was as important as rising costs in stopping plans to construct new plants in almost all Western nations.
The historian Arnold Pacey gives many examples of the management of technology for power and profit.
This is most clearly evident in the defense industries with their close ties to government agencies. But often the
institutional biases associated with expertise are more subtle. Pacey gives as one example the Western experts in
India and Bangladesh who in the 1960s advised the use of large drilling rigs and diesel pumps for wells, imported
from the West. By 1975, two thirds of the pumps had broken down because the users lacked the skills and
maintenance networks to operate them. Pacey calls for greater public participation and a more democratic
distribution of power in the decisions affecting technology. He also urges the upgrading of indigenous technologies,
the exploration of intermediate-scale processes, and greater dialogue between experts and users. Need-oriented
values and local human benefits would then play a larger part in technological change.35
2. THE REDIRECTION OF TECHNOLOGY
The political scientist Victor Ferkiss expresses hope about the redirection of technology. He thinks that both the
optimists and the pessimists have neglected the diversity among different technologies and the potential role of
political structures in reformulating policies. In the past, technology has been an instrument of profit, and decisions
have been motivated by short-run private interests. Freedom understood individualistically became license for the
economically powerful. Individual rights were given precedence over the common good, despite our increasing
interdependence. Choices that could only he made and enforced collectively¡ªsuch as laws concerning air and water
pollution¡ªwere resisted as infringements on free enterprise. But Ferkiss thinks that economic criteria can be
subordinated to such social criteria as ecological balance and human need. He believes it is possible to combine
centralized, systemwide planning in basic decisions with decentralized implementation, cultural diversity, and
citizen participation.36
There is a considerable range of views among contemporary Marxists. Most share Marx¡¯s conviction that
technology is necessary for solving social problems but that under capitalism it has been an instrument of
exploitation, repression, and dehumanization. In modern capitalism, according to Marxists, corporations dominate
the government and political processes serve the interests of the ruling class. The technical elite likewise serves the
profits of the owners. Marxists grant that absolute standards of living have risen for everyone under capitalist
technology. But relative inequalities have increased, so that class distinctions and poverty amidst luxury remain.
Marxists assign justice a higher priority than freedom. Clearly they blame capitalism rather than technology for
these evils of modern industrialism. They believe that alienation and inequality will disappear and technology will
be wholly benign when the working class owns the means of production. The workers, not the technologists, are the
agents of liberation. Marxists are thus as critical as the pessimists concerning the consequences of technology within 
- 9 -
capitalism but as enthusiastic as the optimists concerning its potentialities¡ªwithin a proletarian economic order.
How, then, do Western Marxists view the human effects of technology in Soviet history? Reactions vary,
but many would agree with Bernard Gendron that in the Soviet Union workers were as alienated, factories as
hierarchically organized, experts as bureaucratic, and pollution and militarism as rampant as in the United States.
But Gendron insists that the Soviet Union did not follow Marx¡¯s vision. The means of production were controlled by
a small group within the Communist party, not by the workers. Gendron maintains that in a truly democratic
socialism, technology would be humane and work would not be alienating.37 Most commentators hold that the
demise of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union was a product of both its economic inefficiency and
its political repression. It remains to be seen whether any distinctive legacy from Marxism will remain there after the
economic and political turmoil of the early nineties.
3. THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF TECIINOLOGY
How are science, technology, and society related? Three views have been proposed (see Fig. 1).

 Fig. 1. Views of the Interaction of Science, Technology, and Society
1. Linear development. In linear development it is assumed that science leads to technology, which in turn
has an essentially one-way impact on society. The deployment of technology is primarily a function of the
marketplace. This view is common among the optimists. They consider technology to be predominantly beneficial,
and therefore little government regulation or public policy choice is needed; consumers can influence technological
development by expressing their preferences through the marketplace.
2. Technological Determinism. Several degrees and types of determinism can be distinguished. Strict
determinism asserts that only one outcome is possible. A more qualified claim is that there are very strong
tendencies present in technological systems, but these could be at least partly counteracted if enough people were
committed to resisting them. Again, technology may be considered an autonomous interlocking system, which
develops by its own inherent logic, extended to the control of social institutions. Or the more limited claim is made
that the development and deployment of technology in capitalist societies follows only one path, but the outcomes
might be different in other economic systems. In all these versions, science is itself driven primarily by
technological needs. Technology is either the ¡°independent variable¡± on which other variables are dependent, or it is
the overwhelmingly predominant force in historical change.
Technological determinists will be pessimists if they hold that the consequences of technology are on
balance socially and environmentally harmful. Moreover, any form of determinism implies a limitation of human
freedom and technological choice. However, some determinists retain great optimism about the consequences of
technology. On the other hand, pessimists do not necessarily accept determinism, even in its weaker form. They may 
- 10 -
acknowledge the presence of technological choices but expect such choices to be misused because they are
pessimistic about human nature and institutionalized greed. They may he pessimistic about our ability to respond to
a world of global inequities and scarce resources. Nevertheless, determinism and pessimism are often found together
among the critics of technology.
3. Contextual Interaction. Here there are six arrows instead of two, representing the complex interactions
between science, technology, and society. Social and political forces affect the design as well as the uses of
particular technologies. Technologies are not neutral because social goals and institutional interests are built into the
technical designs that are chosen. Because there are choices, public policy decisions about technology play a larger
role here than in either of the other views. Contextualism is most common among our third group, those who see
technology as an ambiguous instrument of social power.
Contextualists also point to the diversity of science-technology interactions. Sometimes a technology was
indeed based on recent scientific discoveries. Biotechnology, for example, depends directly on recent research in
molecular biology. In other cases, such as the steam engine or the electric power system, innovations occurred with
very little input from new scientific discoveries. A machine or process may have been the result of creative practical
innovation or the modification of an existing technology. As Frederick Ferr¨¦ puts it, science and technology in the
modern world are both products of the combination of theoretical and practical intelligence, and ¡°neither gave birth
to the other.¡±
44 Technology has its own distinctive problems and builds up its own knowledge base and professional
community, though it often uses science as a resource to draw on. The reverse contribution of technology to science
is also often evident. The work of astronomers, for instance, has been dependent on it succession of new
technologies, from optical telescopes to microwave antennae and rockets. George Wise writes, ¡°Historical studies
have shown that the relations between science and technology need not be those of domination and subordination.
Each has maintained its distinctive knowledge base and methods while contributing to the other and to its patrons as
well.¡±
45
In the previous volume, I discussed the ¡°social construction of science¡± thesis, in which it is argued that not
only the direction of scientific development but also the concepts and theories of science are determined by cultural
assumptions and interests. I concluded that the ¡°strong program¡± among sociologists and philosophers of science
carries this historical and cultural relativism too far, and I defended a reformulated understanding of objectivity,
which gives a major role to empirical data while acknowledging the influence of society on interpretive paradigms.
The case for ¡°the social construction of technology¡± seems to me much stronger. Values are built into
particular technological designs. There is no one ¡°best way¡± to design a technology. Different individuals and
groups may define a problem differently and may have diverse criteria of success. Bijker and Pinch show that in the
late nineteenth century inventors constructed many different types of bicycles. Controversies developed about the
relative size of front and rear wheels, seat location, air tires, brakes, and so forth. Diverse users were envisioned
(workers, vacationers, racers, men and women) and diverse criteria (safety, comfort, speed, and so forth). In addition,
the bicycle carried cultural meanings, affecting a person¡¯s self-image and social status. There was nothing logically
or technically necessary about the model that finally won out and is now found around the world.46
The historian John Staudenmaier writes that
contextualism is rooted in the proposition that technical designs cannot be meaningfully interpreted in abstraction from their
human context. The human fabric is not an envelope around a culturally neutral artifact. The values and world views, the
intelligence and stupidity, the biases and vested interests of those who design, accept and maintain a technology are embedded in
the technology itself.47
Both the linear and the determinist view imply that technology determines work organization. It is said that
the technologies of the Industrial Revolution imposed their own requirements and made repetitive tasks inevitable.
The contextualists reply that the design of a technology is itself affected by social relations. The replacement of
workers by machines was intended not only to reduce labor costs but also to assert greater control by management
over labor. For instance, the spinning mule helped to break the power of labor unions among skilled textile workers
in nineteenth-century England.
Other contextualists have pointed to the role of technology in the subordination of women. Engineering was
once considered heavy and dirty work unsuitable for women, but long after it became a clean and intellectual
profession, there are still few women in it. Technology has been an almost exclusively male preserve, reflected in
toys for boys, the expectations of parents and teachers, and the vocational choices and job opportunities open to men
and women. Most technologies are designed by men and add to the power of men.
Strong gender divisions are present among employees of technology-related companies. When telephones
were introduced, women were the switchboard operators and record keepers, while men designed and repaired the 
- 11 -
equipment and managed the whole system. Typesetting in large printing frames once required physical strength and
mechanical skills and was a male occupation. But men continued to exclude women from compositors¡¯ unions when
linotype, and more recently computer formatting, required only typing and formatting skills.48 Today most computer
designers and programmers are men, while in offices most of the data are entered at computer keyboards by women.
With many middle-level jobs eliminated, these lower-level jobs often become dead ends for women.49 A study of
three computerized industries in Britain found that women were the low-paid operators, while only men understood
and controlled the equipment, and men almost never worked under the supervision of women.50
Note that contextualism allows for a two-way interaction between technology and society. When
technology is treated as merely one form of cultural expression among others, its distinctive characteristics may be
ignored. In some renditions, the way in which technology shapes culture are forgotten while the cultural forces on
technology are scrutinized. The impact of technology on society is particularly important in the transfer of a
technology to a new cultural setting in a developing country. Some Third World authors have been keenly aware of
technology as an instrument of power, and they portray a two-way interaction between technology and society
across national boundaries.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The optimists stress the contribution of technology to economic development. They hold that greater productivity
improves standards of living and makes food and health more widely available. For most of them, the most
important form of participatory freedom is the economic freedom of the marketplace, though in general they are
also committed to political democracy. These authors say that social justice and environmental protection should not
be ignored, but they must not be allowed to jeopardize economic goals. The optimists usually evaluate technology in
a utilitarian framework, seeking to maximize the balance of costs over benefits.
The pessimists typically make personal fulfillment their highest priority, and they interpret fulfillment in
terms of human relationships and community life rather than material possessions. They are concerned about
individual rights and the dignity of persons. They hold that meaningful work is as important as economic
productivity in policies for technology. The pessimists are dedicated to resource sustainability and criticize the high
levels of consumption in industrial societies today. They often advocate respect for all creatures and question the
current technological goal of mastery of nature.
The contextualists are more likely to give prominence to social justice because they interpret technology as
both a product and an instrument of social power. For them the most important forms of participatory freedom are
opportunities for participation in political processes and in work-related decisions. They are less concerned about
economic growth than about how that growth is distributed and who receives the costs and the benefits.
Contextualists often seek environmental protection because they are aware of the natural as well as the social
contexts in which technologies operate.
I am most sympathetic with the contextualists, though I am indebted to many of the insights of the
pessimists. Four issues seem to me particularly important in analyzing the differences among the positions outlined
above.
1. Defense of the Personal. The pessimists have defended human values in a materialistic and impersonal
society. The place to begin, they say, is one¡¯s own life. Each of us can adopt individual life-styles more consistent
with human and environmental values. Moreover, strong protest and vivid examples are needed to challenge the
historical dominance of technological optimism and the disproportionate resource consumption of affluent societies.
I admire these critics for defending individuality and choice in the face of standardization and bureaucracy. I join
them in upholding the significance of personal relationships and a vision of personal fulfillment that goes beyond
material affluence. I affirm the importance of the spiritual life, but I do not believe that it requires a rejection of
technology. The answer to the destructive features of technology is not less technology but technology of the right
kind.
2. The Role of Politics. Differing models of social change are implied in the three positions. The first group
usually assumes a free market model. Technology is predominantly beneficial, and the reduction of any undesirable
side effects is itself a technical problem for the experts. Government intervention is needed only to regulate the most
harmful impacts. Writers mentioned in the second section, by contrast, typically adopt some variant of technological
determinism. Technology is dehumanizing and uncontrollable. They see runaway technology as all autonomous and
all-embracing system that molds all of life, including the political sphere, to its requirements. The individual is
helpless within the system. The views expressed in the third section presuppose a ¡°social conflict¡± model.
Technology influences human life but is itself part of a cultural system; it is an instrument of social power serving 
- 12 -
the purposes of those who control it. It does systematically impose distinctive forms on all areas of life, but these
can be modified through political processes. Whereas the first two groups give little emphasis to politics, the third,
with which I agree, holds that conflicts concerning technology must be resolved primarily in the political arena.
3. The Redirection of Technology. I believe that we should neither accept uncritically the past directions of
technological development nor reject technology in toto but redirect it toward the realization of human and
environmental values. In the past, technological decisions have usually been governed by narrowly economic
criteria, to the neglect of environmental and human costs. In a later chapter we will look at technology assessment, a
procedure designed to use a broad range of criteria to evaluate the diverse consequences of an emerging
technology¡ªbefore it has been deployed and has developed the vested interests and institutional momentum that
make it seem uncontrollable. I will argue that new policy priorities concerning agriculture, energy, resource
allocation, and the redirection of technology toward basic human needs can be achieved within democratic political
institutions. The key question will be: What decision-making processes and what technological policies can
contribute to human and environmental values?
4. The Scale of Technology. Appropriate technology can be thought of as an attempt to achieve some of the
material benefits of technology outlined in the first section without the destructive human costs discussed in the
second section, most of which result from large-scale centralized technologies. Intermediate-scale technology allows
decentralization and greater local participation in decisions. The decentralization of production also allows greater
use of local materials and often a reduction of impact on the environment. Appropriate technology does not imply a
return to primitive and prescientific methods; rather, it seeks to use the best science available toward goals different
from those that have governed industrial production in the past.
Industrial technology was developed when capital and resources were abundant, and we continue to assume
these conditions. Automation, for example, is capital-intensive and labor saving. Yet in developing nations capital is
scarce and labor is abundant. The technologies needed there must be relatively inexpensive and labor-intensive.
They must be of intermediate scale so that jobs can be created in rural areas and small towns, to slow down mass
migration to the cities. They must fulfill basic human needs, especially for food, housing, and health. Alternative
patterns of modernization are less environmentally and socially destructive than the path that we have followed. It is
increasingly evident that many of these goals are desirable also in industrial nations. I will suggest that we should
develop a mixture of large- and intermediate-scale technologies, which will require deliberate encouragement of the
latter.
The redirection of technology will be no easy task. Contemporary technology is so tightly tied to industry,
government, and the structures of economic power that changes in direction will be difficult to achieve. As the
critics of technology recognize, the person who tries to work for change within the existing order may be absorbed
by the establishment. But the welfare of humankind requires a creative technology that is economically productive,
ecologically sound, socially just, and personally fulfilling.
References
1. Charles Susskind, Understanding Technology (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973), p. 132.
2. John Zerman and Alice Carnes, eds., Questioning Technology (Santa Cruz, CA: New Society Publishers, 1991), p. 217.
3. C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (New York: Macmillan, 1965), p. 69.
4. Among the volumes dealing with broad attitudes toward technology are Albert H. Teich, ed., Technology and the
Future, 5th ed. (New York: St Martin¡¯s Press, 1989), and Carl Mitcham and Robert Mackey, eds., Philosophy and
Technology (New York: Free Press, 1972).
5. This is close to the definition given by Arnold Pacey in The Culture of Technology (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1983), p. 6.
Pacey adds ¡°living things¡± among the ¡°ordered systems¡± (in order to include agriculture, medicine, and biotechnology),
but I suggest that these are already included under the rubric of ¡°practical tasks.¡± Frederick Ferr¨¦, Philosophy of
Technology (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988), defines technology as ¡°the practical implementation of
intelligence¡± and argues that intelligence itself has both practical and theoretical forms.
6. Emanuel Mesthene, Technological Change: Its Impact on Man and Society (New York: New American Library, 1970).
7. Melvin Kranzberg, ¡°Technology the Liberator,¡± in Technology at the Turning Point, ed. William Pickett (San
Francisco: San Francisco Press, 1977). See also Charles Susskind, Understanding Technology.
8. Emanuel Mesthene, ¡°Technology as Evil: Fear or Lamentation?¡± in Research in Philosophy and Technology, vol. 7, ed.
Paul Durbin (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1984).
9. Daniel Bell, The Coming Postindustrial Society (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
10. Buckminster Fuller, The Critical Path (New York: St. Martin¡¯s Press, 1981); Herman Kahn et al., The Next 200 Years
(New York: William Morrow, 1976); Alvin Toffler, Future Shock (New York: Bantam, 1971) and The Third Wave
(New York: William Morrow, 1980). 
- 13 -
11. Samuel Florman, The Existential Pleasure of Engineering (New York: St. Martin¡¯s Press, 1977) and Blaming
Technology: The Irrational Search for Scapegoats, (New York: St. Martin¡¯s Press. 1981).
12. Forman, Blaming Technology, p. 188.
13. Cf. Alvin Weinberg, ¡°Can Technology Replace Social Engineering,¡± in Technology and the Future, ed. Tecih.
14. Samuel Florman, ¡°Science for Public Consumption: More Than We Can Chew?¡± Technology Review 86 (April 1983)
12-13.
15. Florman, Blaming Technology, p. 193.
16. Harvey Cox, The Secular City (New York: Macmillan, 1965), and ¡°The Responsibility of the Christian in a World of
Technology," in Science and Religion, ed. Ian G. Barbour (New York: Harper & Row, 1968).
17. W. Norris Clarke. S.J., ¡°Technology and Man: A Christian Vision,¡± in Science and Religion, ed. Barbour.
18. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Future of Man, trans. Norman Denny (New York: Harper & Row, 1961), chaps. 8, 9,
and 10. See also ¡°The Place of' Technology in a General Biology of Mankind,¡± and ¡°On Looking at a Cyclotron,¡± in
The Activation of Energy (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971).
19. George Wise, ¡°Science and Technology,¡± Osiris, 2d ser., 1 (1985): 229-46.
20. See for example Lewis Mumford, The Myth of the Machine, vol. 1, Technics and Human Development, and vol. 2, The
Pentagon of Power (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1967 and 1969).
21. Studs Terkel, Working (New York: Pantheon, 1972); Robert Schrag, Ten Thousand Working Days (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1978); William A. Faunce, Problems of an Industrial Society, 2d ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981).
22. Theodore Roszak, The Making of a Counter Culture (New York: Doubleday, 1969), and Where the Wasteland Ends
(New York: Doubleday, 1972); sec Ian G. Barbour. ¡°Science. Religion, and the Counterculture,¡± Zygon 10 (1975):
380-97.
23. Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society, trans. J. Wilkinson (New York: Knopf. 1964); also The Technological System,
trans. J. Neugroschel (New York: Continuum, 1980), and The Technological Bluff, trans. G. Bromiley (Grand Rapids:
Eedmans, 1999).
24. Darrell Fasching, ¡°The Dialectic of Apocalypse and Utopia in the Theological Ethics of Jacques Ellul,¡± in Research in
Philosophy and Technology, vol. 10, ed. Frederick Ferr¨¦ (Greenwich, CT:JAI Press, 1990).
25. Langdon Winner, Autonomous Technology (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977) and The Reactor and the Whale (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986).
26. Hans Jonas, The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for the Technological Age (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1984), p. x.
27. Albert Borgmann, Technology and the Character off Contemporary Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984);
Martin Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology, trans. William Lovitt (New York: Harper & Row, 1977).
28. David Kipnis, Technology and Power (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1990).
29. Langdon Gilkey, Religion and the Scientific Future (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
30. Paul Tillich, ¡°The Person in a Technological Society,¡± in Social Ethics, ed. Gibson Winter (New York: Harper & Row,
1968).
31. Gabriel Marcel, ¡°The Sacred in the Technological Age,¡± Theology Today 19 (1962): 27-38.
32. Martin Buber. I and Thou, trans. R. G. Smith (New York: Charles Scribner¡¯s Sons, 1937).
33. P. Hans Sun, ¡°Notes on How to Begin to Think about Technology in a Theological Way,¡± in Theology and Technology,
ed. Carl Mitcham and Jim Grote (New York: University Press of America, 1984).
34. Thomas Misa, ¡°How Machines Make History, and How Historians (and Others) Help Them Do So,¡± Science,
Technology & Human Values 13 (1988): 308-31.
35. Arnold Pacey, Culture of Technology.
36. Victor Ferkiss, Technological Man and The Future of Technological Civilizations (New York: George Braziller, 1969
and 1974).
37. Bernard Gendron, Technology and the Human Condition (New York: St. Martin¡¯s Press, 1977).
38. Norman Faramelli, Technethics (New York: Friendship Press, 1971).
39. J. Edward Carothers, Margaret Mead, Daniel McCracken, and Roger Shinn, eds., To Love or to Perish: The
Technological Crisis and the Churches (New York: Friendship Press, 1972); Paul Abrecht and Roger Shinn, eds., Faith
and Science in an Unjust World (Geneva: World Council of Churches, 1980).
40. Thomas Derr, ¡°Conversations about Ultimate Matters: Theological Motifs in WCC Studies on the Technological
Future,¡± International Review of Missions 66 (1977): 123-34.
41. Egbert Schuurman, Technology and the Future (Toronto: Wedge Publishing. 1980), also ¡°The Modern Babylon
Culture,¡± in Technology and Responsibility, ed. Paul Durbin (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1987), and ¡°A Christian
Philosophical Perspective on Technology,¡± in Theology and Technology, ed. Mitcham and Grote. Schuurman was also
a contributor to Stephen Monsma, ed. Responsible Technology: A Christian Perspective (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1986).
42. Roger Shinn, Forced Options: Social Decisions for the 21st Century, 3d ed. (Cleveland: Pilgrim Press, 1991).
43. Richard Niebuhr, Christ and Culture (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1951). See also Carl Mitcham, ¡°Technology as a
Theological Problem in the Christian Tradition,¡± in Theology Technology, ed. Mitcham and Grote.
44. Ferr¨¦, Philosophy of Technology, p. 44.
45. Wise, ¡°Science and Technology.¡±
- 14 -
46. Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker, ¡°The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts: Or How the Sociology of Science and
the Sociology of Technology Might Benefit from Each Other,¡± in The Social Construction of Technological Systems,
ed. Wiebe Bijker, Thomas Hughes, and Trevor Pinch (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987).
47. John W. Staudenmaier, Technology¡¯s Storyteller (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985), p. 165.
48. Cynthia Cockburn, ¡°The Material of Male Power,¡± in The Social Shaping of Technology, ed. Donald McKenzie and
Judy Wajcman (Milton Keynes, England: Open University Press, 1985).
49. Roslyn Feldberg and Evelyn Nakano Glenn, ¡°Technology and Work Degradation: Effects of Office Automation on
Women Clerical Workers,¡± in Machina Ex Dea: Feminist Perspectives on Technology, ed. Joan Rothschild (New York:
Pergamon Press, 1983); see also articles by Cheris Kramarae, Anne Machung, and others in Technology and Women¡¯s
Voices, ed. Cheris Kramarae (New York and London: Routledge &. Kegan Paul, 1988).
50. Cynthia Cockburn, Machinery of Dominance: Women, Men, and Technological Know-How (London: Pluto Press,
1985).